How to Adjust Image to Higher or Lower Resolution using Python (#6102)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/image-adjustment-to-higher-or-lower-resolution-using-python/index.md

﻿---
layout: engineering-education
status: publish
published: true
url: /image-adjustment-to-higher-or-lower-resolution-using-python/
title: How to Adjust Image to Higher or Lower Resolution using Python
description: In this tutorial, we will discuss how to adjust images to higher or lower resolutions using basic tools such as OpenCV.
author: jacob-muganda
date: 2022-01-25T00:00:00-10:30
topics: [Languages]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
images:

  - url: /engineering-education/image-adjustment-to-higher-or-lower-resolution-using-python/hero.jpg
    alt: How to Adjust Image to Higher or Lower Resolution using Python Hero Image
---
Low-resolution images can at times not bring out the desired information and accurate details. To overcome this challenge there is a need for the adjustment of resolutions in an image.
<!--more-->

> In this tutorial, we will need to use some basic tools such as OpenCV, used in computer vision-based tasks, and the main function is required in our tutorial for image processing.

Reviewer: What is the main function you are referring to here?

### Table of contents
- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [How to install and use Pillow and NumPy](#introduction-in-how-to-instal-and-use-pillow-and-numpy)
- [Having the colors fixed](#having-the-colors-fixed)
- [Implementing contrast enhancement](#implementing-contrast-enhancement)
- [Laplacian Pyramid Super-Resolution Network](#Laplacian-pyramid-super-resolution-network)
- [Scaling down the images to lower resolutions](#scaling-down-the-images-to-lower-resolutions)
- [Scaling up the images to higher resolutions](#scaling-up-the-images-to-higher-resolutions)
- [Application fields for adjusting image resolution](#application-fields-for-adjusting-image-resolution)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

### Prerequisites

> The reader has to be familiar with the Python programming language basics to follow along with this tutorial. Refer to this [beginners guide to python](/engineering-education/a-beginners-guide-to-python/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reader has to be familiar with the Python programming language basics to follow along with this tutorial. Refer to this [beginners guide to Python](/engineering-education/a-beginners-guide-to-python/)
```

> ### How to install and use Pillow and Numpy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### How to install and use Pillow and NumPy
```

Using any text editor of your choice, you will be required to run a few codes. To work with cv2 you will be required to install OpenCV.

To implement this, in your terminal, run the command below if you don't have it pre-installed.

```bash
 pip install OpenCV-Python
```

After openCV has been installed, it allows for importing modules such as cv2.
The second installation to be done is the `NumPy`.

```bash
 pip install numpy
```

This allows for the usage of packages implementing multidimensional arrays. The third installation to be carried out involves `pillow` installation.

```bash
pip install pillow
```

Also known as the `PIL` module, it allows for manipulating and processing images. Depending on the versions, you may be required to update to the latest version.

To update to the latest version, we will use the below command:

```bash
C:\Users\lizpa\PycharmProjects\jupyter\venv\Scripts\python.exe -m pip install --upgrade pip
```

You will have to change the path according to your machine's directory.

### Having the colors fixed
Images are made up of pixels in the form of X and Y coordinates. Having the colors fixed, we will have to use the RGB color format.

> This occurs when one color in the RGB format is omitted, let's say if blue is, the image will lack the blue pigment and any traces of it since every single pixel has blue taken away from it leaving only red and green components.

Reviewer: There is a word missing here after `let's say blue is` ?

The construction is like a pyramid with the lower quality image being upscaled till the end. Parameter sharing is frequently used for speed. It has two parts, the extraction stage, and the reconstruction stage. 

The Laplacian pyramid is formed by the difference between the level in the `Gaussian Pyramid` and the extended version of its upper level in the pyramid. 

Let us get started!

### Instance 1
### Scaling down the images to lower resolution
We will scale down the images to lower resolutions in the Gaussian Pyramid model. To perform this task we will be using the image below:

![sean](/engineering-education/image-adjustment-to-higher-or-lower-resolution-using-python/sean.jpg)

```py
import cv2
import numpy as np
img = cv2.imread("sean.jpg")#Here we will be reading the image
layer = img.copy()
gp = [layer] #Declaring a variable hence creating the Gaussian Pyramid array.
for j in range(10):#Providing room for iteration.
    layer = cv2.pyrDown(layer)
    gp.append(layer)
    cv2.imshow(str(j), layer)#This function displays the multiple images created.
cv2.imshow("Original image", img)#This will have the original image displayed.
cv2.waitKey(0)
cv2.destroyAllWindows()
```

> Your output should match the below image:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your output should be like the image shown below.
```

![low](/engineering-education/image-adjustment-to-higher-or-lower-resolution-using-python/low.jpg)

### Instance 2
### Scaling up the images to higher resolutions.
Once you increase the resolution of an already lowered resolution image, it will not go back to its original form. This is because lowering the resolution loses some information about the image using the `pyrDown` method hence the results look a little blurred. 

> This is different from scaling up an original image.

```py
import cv2
import numpy as np
img = cv2.imread("sean.jpg")
#We will be factoring down images using the already scaled.
lwr1 = cv2.pyrDown(img)
lwr2 = cv2.pyrDown(lwr1)
lwr3 = cv2.pyrDown(lwr2)
lwr4 = cv2.pyrDown(lwr3)
# We will be Increasing the resolution of already scaled down image that is lwr4.
hir1 = cv2.pyrUp(lwr3)

cv2.imshow("Original image", img)
cv2.imshow("First Scaled Down Image", lwr1)
cv2.imshow("Second Scaled Down Image", lwr2)
cv2.imshow("Third Scaled Down Image", lwr3)
cv2.imshow("Fourth Scaled Down Image", lwr4)
cv2.imshow("First Scaled Up Image", hir1)

cv2.waitKey(0)
cv2.destroyAllWindows()
```

> The output should be similar to the below image:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your output should be like the image shown below.
```

![high](/engineering-education/image-adjustment-to-higher-or-lower-resolution-using-python/high.jpg)

### Instance 3

> To construct the Laplacian Pyramid Super-Resolution Network, we will be taking the top-level layer of the Gaussian Pyramid which is the last image generated using the loop function then create a list for the Laplacian pyramid then create the extended version of the upper level of the Gaussian Pyramid.

Reviewer: This sentence is a whole paragraph, break it down and make sure it is comprehensive

> To understand it better a code snippet will do:

Reviewer: Rephrase this sentence in a better way

```py
import cv2
img = cv2.imread("sean.jpg")
layer = img.copy()
gp = [layer]
for j in range(2):
    layer = cv2.pyrDown(layer)
    gp.append(layer)

layer = gp[2]
cv2.imshow("Gausian Upper level", layer)
lp = [layer]#Introduce and create a list for the Laplacian Pyramid.

for j in range(2, 0, -1):
    Gausian_extended = cv2.pyrUp(gp[j])#Creating the Laplacian Pyramid.
laplacian = cv2.subtract(gp[j-1], Gausian_extended)
cv2.imshow(str(j), laplacian)

cv2.imshow("Original image", img)
cv2.waitKey(0)
cv2.destroyAllWindows()
```

Confirm with the below displayed:

![lapsn](/engineering-education/image-adjustment-to-higher-or-lower-resolution-using-python/lapsn.png)

The Laplacian pyramid and the Gaussian Pyramid are applied in the blending and reconstruction of the images.

### Application fields for adjusting image resolution

> - **Applied in the field of Astronomy**: This is achieved by focusing on tiny information of images to higher resolutions that bring out clearer vision.
> - **Closed Circuit Television**: Feeds received from the CCTV footage can be focused to get clearer images by resolving and fixing the colors where possible.
> - **Medicine**: Images received from scans such as the X-Rays require adjustment of resolutions to provide detailed and accurate information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Astronomy** - This is achieved by focusing on tiny information of images to higher resolutions that bring out clearer vision.
- **Closed Circuit Television** -  Feeds received from a CCTV footage can be focused to get clearer images by resolving and fixing the colors where possible.
- **Medicine** - Images received from scans such as the X-Rays need adjustment of resolutions to provide detailed and accurate information.
```

### Conclusion

> Covering all the details required in this tutorial, you are now equipped to handle matters concerning this tutorial. Being able to accurately work with this area of discussion and produce maximum results now, wish you all the best.

Reviewer: I feel this conclusion is very basic. Give a better conclusion that summarizes the content of your article briefly.
